---
year: 2024
title: "2024 Reading List"
tags: ["reviews", "reading-list"]
title: "2024 Reading List"
description: Top reads for 2024
image:
  feature: 'review-2022/fireworks-2022.jpg'
---

## Literature

All four of these are incredibly well written and fresh. Not going to review them individually, will just give you an excerpt from each.

### Yddish Policemen's Union
Michael Chabon


> Nine months Landsman’s been flopping at the Hotel Zamenhof without any of his fellow residents managing to get themselves murdered. Now somebody has put a bullet in the brain of the occupant of 208, a yid who was calling himself Emanuel Lasker.

### A Visit From The Goon Squad / Candy House
Jennifer Egan

> “Time’s a goon, right? You gonna let that goon push you around?” Scotty shook his head. “The goon won.”

### The Office Of Historical Corrections
Danielle Evans

> I used to think you were so brave, and sometimes I still do, and sometimes I think it’s just that there’s nothing in your life but you, and you have no idea what it means to be scared that what you do might matter.

### Writers & Lovers
Lily King

> Fitzgerald said that the sign of genius is being able to hold two contradictory ideas in your head at the same time. But what if you hold two contradictory fears? Are you still some kind of a genius?


Non-fiction

### The Price of Peace
Zachary D. Carter

Biography of John Maynard Keynes, who I previously only knew nothing of except the economic school of thought he is famously known for. Usually not into biographies but this was good.

Made me appreciate how his thought was shaped by real world experience: across both world wars, involvement in the arts, and a deep-seated desire to create the conditions for peace — of which economics plays a critical role.

Also gave me a new lens into international relations around that time.

### Maybe You Should Tak To Someone
Lori Gottlieb

Memoir of a therapist, centered on her own journey through therapy. Funny, more twists than you’d expect from a memoir, and a lot of insight into the therapeutic process.

### Outlive
Peter Attia

What do you want to be able to do at eighty? Figure that out then work backwards. You probably need to be a _lot_ stronger today to account for inevitable physical decline.

Wasn't simply about "do exercise" though. What types of exercise? Why? Also covers nutrition, drugs, and mental health from an evidence informed perspective.

> It’s important, obviously, that our strategy be based on evidence.
> Unfortunately, the pursuit of longevity is where the most powerful tool of
> Medicine 2.0, the randomized clinical trial in humans, runs into a brick
> wall. Randomized controlled trials are used to determine cause and effect in
> relatively simple, short-term situations. It’s fairly easy, for example, to
> run a study showing that sunscreen prevents sunburn. But such studies are of
> limited use in our quest for longevity.

> People get old when they stop thinking about the future.

### Against The Tide
David T. Oliver

Best management book I've read in a while, even though it's ostensibly a biography. Admiral Rickover was the man behind the USA's nuclear submarine program. Packed with insight, particular as it relates to managing both process compliance and innovation at the same time.

> By insisting on strict process control for routine evolutions yet
> concurrently encouraging individuals to challenge his system and his
> processes, Rickover was able to institute a scheme in which individuals did
> not have to choose between process and innovation. The nuclear-submarine
> force would value both.


Fantasty & Sci-Fi

### Piranesi
Susanna Clarke

Weirdly unique. A good paced short read.

### Light Bringer

Pierce Brown

Book six of the Red Rising saga. Was losing interest in the series after its initially strong start, but this book turned it around. Great mix of action and plot.

### The Mountain IN The Sea
Ray Nayler

Near future AI and climated sci-fi. Also there is an octopus. Great
themes.

### Artificial Wisdom
Thomas R. Weaver

Another near future AI/climate sci-fi. Very different to previous
recommendation, much more action heavy and not as well written but still
worthwhile for the themes.
